The community evidently decided they wanted A&M to invest more money.
At the time, as far as I can recall, A&M ran geology summer field camp there.
They also ran surveying courses at Junction, and they may have run some remedial math summer programs for high school students.
But in any event, suddenly I wake up one day and I find out that the legislature has given this to Texas Tech to run.
Now, I was never in that loop.
And that's why I say my department head
probably, Terry was not a good person to be a department head, an administrator.
So this got swept out from under our research facility, which later on would have become, with more people on the staff, could have become a major research facility for the institution.
Very, very fine example of a missed opportunity.
Do you remember any possible grants or research funding chances?
Not that I was involved in, but I'm sure there were
numerous opportunities, I mean, grants that were turned down.
The life of a professor in that college was writing proposals.
But our, I mean, I think the college as a whole could be very proud of the fact that
on a per capita basis, we were bringing more research dollars into the university than any of the other colleges.
And most of it was competitive.
Not all of it, but most of it.
A while ago, you were giving high praise to Dr. Byers.
What about, did you have any, you and your colleagues have any impression of Wayne Hall as the chief academic officer at A&M when you came?
I didn't really.
I mean, I met him.
I vaguely recall him, but I had no impression.
What about Earl Rudder?
I have some mixed feelings about Earl, okay?
When I came to A&M, I suppose you'd call me a young Turk.
I was a member of AAUP, and
It goes back to the case of a professor somewhere in one of the agricultural- Veterinary medicine.
Vet medicine, who was in the process of getting a divorce and was dating somebody else.
And the department head, as far as I can recall, the department head felt this was wrong and whatever.
I don't know the full story, except I certainly didn't believe that one's personal life should be separate from what kind of a job one is doing.
And I can remember going with a group of AUP people to talk with Rudder.
And Rudder, being Rudder, told us where we were to get off.
Now, I don't know.
Wayne Hall, maybe he was dean at that time or not.
I don't know.
But, you know, I saw this happen again in my own college many years later.
Maybe we should talk off.
With Mr. Rudder's passing, we soon had Jack Williams here in early 1971.
Now, before he came, though, there had been some basic changes made in the 60s of co-education, non-compulsory corps of cadets, racial integration, higher admission requirements, broadening of the curriculum,
How did those changes begin to affect you and your colleagues?
Well, I think the biggest effect is that we soon had an enrollment of some very capable women coming into the college.
In geophysics through the 70s, early 80s, we recruited
students using scholarship money that was given us by the petroleum companies.
And we did that both the graduate and the undergraduate level.
And we were very successful for a number of years there.
We always had small classes, but we had outstanding students.
In geophysics, it's been particularly hard to recruit women faculty, for example.
And I've known of a couple of our graduate students that we dearly would have loved to have gone into teaching and chose to go with industry.
That's one of the problems we had in geophysics is that these very good young women
would go to industry and frequently not go on to graduate work.
In terms of minority students, again, in geophysics, geophysics is not the most attractive discipline for somebody coming out of high school or even out of college.
Why not?
Number one, I think visibility.
People know about engineering.
and they know about oceanography, but usually it's only biology.
They don't understand how geophysics applies.
It doesn't have that milieu that goes with being an engineer.
And so, you have, and furthermore, it's very demanding.
That is, you have to have both math and physics skills.
And so, again, that limits
Now, for some years there, in the 70s and early 80s, our undergraduates walking out with a B.S.
in geophysics were just snapped up by industry left and right.
You couldn't get students to go on.
Very few of them would go on to graduate school.
And we had a few women.
But I can only recall one or two minority students.
The picture you are painting of geophysics,
I presume that would be true nationally, that it's not that well known among high school students.
It is thought by many to be intimidating
they're not really sure what it leads to.
Is that true nationally?
That's true nationally.
And in fact, Bob Unneberger eventually put together a program where we send out material.
We get the listings of national science scholarship students, national merit scholarship students, and send it out nationwide.
And we also send out the Society of Exploration Geophysics.
We send out their literature.
And that worked great for about 10 or 12 years.
All right, now you mentioned Bob Unterberger.
I remember roughly when he was being courted in the 1960s.
Do you remember anything about who found him and how he got here?
He came, I'm not sure if it was the same year as Terry Spencer or a year later.
And I was not on the search committee, so I don't recall.
But, of course, he came with Betty.
Where was he?
He was a colleague of Terry's in industry, I think.
I think they came from the same company.
From out in California?
From California.
Now, Bob was a graduate of Duke.
That's where his PhD was.
Because I was working then as an assistant dean of the graduate school and assistant vice president of academic affairs for Wayne Hall, and one of the—they were courting
Dr. Unterberger, Bob Unterberger, and I remember his showing me Mrs. Betty, also Dr. Unterberger, showing me her resume and apparently one, this is a guess on my part, I gather that Bob finally said he would not accept an appointment here unless a slot was found for Betty.
I'm sure that that's the situation, but I was not involved in, and I'm sure Terry is the one that initiated the search.
What was his, what are Bob Anderberger's specialties?
Okay, he's an applied geophysicist.
He was doing electrical type of studies.
He had also done rubidium vapor magnetometry.
When he came to A&M, his major research interests were looking at the electrical conductivity in salt domes to try to understand the structure of salt domes.
It turns out there are wet domes and dry domes and so forth.
So, that was his research area.
He was using radar.
He was one of the pioneers in using radar as a geophysical tool.
And he demonstrated that you could transmit in dry solid, you could transmit electrical energy or electromagnetic energy in an extremely long way.
As you all got the department really into high gear,
Can you guesstimate the number of graduating seniors and graduate degrees in an average year?
Never large, probably in our heyday, we were probably graduating 12 to 15 undergraduates, something of that order.
And if you, in terms of graduate students, probably three or four PhDs and six or eight MSs, something of that order.
But that would also include people perhaps that were geologists doing tectonophysics and were heavily into geophysics as a tool.
And in those years, the relationships between the departments within the College of Geosciences were comparatively positive and strong?
There's always been a little bit of an east-west, well, a tilt
a jousting between Oceanography Meteorology over there in the O&M building, and Geology Geophysics over there in the Halbooty building.
And the Dean's office is over there in the O&M building.
And so we've always had, or hopefully had, an Associate Dean for Research
And the question always was, well, sometimes we've had two.
One from the solid Earth and the other from oceanography and meteorology.
Oh, OK.
OK.
Now, let's see.
The Deans, Byers was a?
Meteorologist.
OK.
Then Cook?
Geographer.
All right.
And who was next?
Friedman.
And he's a geologist.
Then after him... Bob Deuce, he's a chemical atmospheric chemist.
And now Dave Pryor is a geologist.
Right, now I'm not going to ask you the negative on this.
Looking back over all... Oh, in between there, there was Gordon Eaton.
Gordon, oh yes, yes.
He's an oceanographer.
Before Friedman.
Isn't he an oceanographer?
He's a geologist, volcanologist.
He's a geologist.
All right.
Looking at all of those deans, I'm not going to ask you the negative.
To which of those would you give the highest grades for successes in leading the college?
Gordon Eaton.
Why?
I'm not disagreeing with you.
No, no.
In my view, it was a sad day when he moved up.
Gordon is just a really fine administrator in a quiet way.
He's highly respected as a scientist, and for some reason, he's been through the mill.
He had done administration in the survey, and of course he went
went from there to Iowa State, and then he went to LDGO as director, and then he went on to downsize the survey before, save it from, but somehow or other, he had, it's hard to put it into words, the fact, aside from total integrity, he had vast knowledge of
What was going on?
And he was a good people person.
Oh, yeah.
Now, Mel, we've always been lucky in our college, I think, in that all our deans had integrity.
Now, they had different styles, but Mel Friedman, Mel's biggest problem was that he made decisions too quickly.
You know, he cleared his desk every night.
And sometimes he'd make a decision that maybe he later should have regretted.
I have a slight link to him academically.
He walked across the stage to get his Ph.D.
at Rice the same night I did, and he was immediately behind me in the line.
as they lined us up.
I've never understood how a Green Hut and a Monroe could be, but I remember we were near each other.
There was a, help me remember the name, under Mr. Rutter, we had a vice president for research, who was a kind of a character,
And he would not survive very long under Dr. Williams.
He lived by himself at the new... Oh, I remember that character.
He lived up on the tower.
Yes.
And what was his name?
And he was supposed to be a great guru.
I don't know.
Now, wait a minute.
He was supposed to do something about Galveston.
Right.
Because for those of us in the humanities, we didn't like him because one time he addressed the arts and sciences faculty and told us that research that was not funded was not worth doing.
If someone would not pay to fund it, then it was not of any value at all.
And that he, as we understood him also, that he said that you can measure the value of it by how much someone is willing to fund it.
That the bigger the grant, the more important the topic.
He didn't last long.
No.
And I've forgotten his name, but I remember he was sort of, I felt he was sort of a,
slimy character.
I mean, whatever, but I didn't like him.
And didn't he go on to one of the medical institutions in Houston?
Yes, yes.
No, at Galveston.
The medical branch at Galveston.
He supposedly was going to bring them research glory, too.
And I don't know what happened to him after that.
Let's see, Mr. Rudder suddenly died one month before his 60th birthday in 1970, and then that fall Jack Williams came.
Did you and your colleagues have any impression of him as the president of Texas A&M?
I have.
I don't know if my colleagues do.
I have because I was on the
That committee that was supposed to resolve these faculty issues over, what is it, tenure and advisory tenure, academic advisory and tenure committee.
In my first year on that committee, we had a major debacle going on in bioengineering.
I've forgotten the name of the
individual, but a faculty member was in direct combat with the department head, and the department head sort of banished this guy to Texarkana, I think.
I don't know, we had a branch up there or something.
But in any event, this issue came to that committee, and we held hearings all spring.
And in order to, I can remember, sort of interesting, we wanted to have input from Dean Benson.
And Dean Benson said he would not appear before the committee.
All we had to do, our committee reported, didn't report through any channel.
It reported to Director Jack Williams, Dean Benson appeared before the committee.
And we never, I mean, we had a, we thought we had maybe a solution that would have been satisfactory.
Fortunately, both people disappeared at the end of that semester.
I don't know whether you remember that.
And then two years later, I was chairman of that committee.
But fortunately, we didn't have any disasters.
So, you know, I had high regard for, personally, for Jack Williams and his values.
But I don't think anybody, he really didn't, as far as I recall, affect our teaching and so forth.
What about John Calhoun, who became Vice President when Dr. Byers retired?
We have very warm feelings for John, because he was very supportive of earth sciences.
What were his many qualities as you all saw them?
Well, and again, I didn't...
All I can remember is he got some things done, and I don't know what they were at the time.
But he was probably very instrumental in the oceanography program, I think, more than in the solid earth sciences.
But again, you'll have to ask John what he did.
He did so many things.
And I've known him off and on, but not on a
a working level, except I know he had me on a, I was getting checks at one time from C-Crad or something, it was early years or something, and I didn't know what my responsibilities were.
I don't know why I was put on this, but they said, call Calhoun.
But no, I can't really add, I can't add to that.
You mentioned that you became one of the associate deans.
About when was that?
Okay, that's another story.
During Earl Cook's regime service, Joe Sonnenfeld was an Associate Dean, or I don't know, the Assistant Dean for Student Affairs.
And he was going back full-time to teaching.
And I'm not sure whether Ken Brundage was in line to do that or not, but Ken couldn't for— Earl called me up and said, I had some good reviews by students or something.
He called me up, maybe somebody recommended me, but in any event, he called me up and asked me if I would substitute for a semester.
as an assistant dean.
So I went over and I sat down with Earl, and I said, okay, first of all, I would only do it half-time.
I was still teaching, and I've always done that.
But I said, Earl, what if I like doing this, and I'm doing a good job?
You know, maybe I want to continue.
So at that time, he said, yeah, okay.
So I went over, and I was assistant dean in charge of the undergraduate and graduate instructional programs.
And of course, it's a small college.
a tremendous job.
It isn't like the business college, where you've got several thousand students.
At most, we had, I think our enrollment got up to 1,000 total at maximum.
And I certainly knew all the faculty members in the small college.
I knew all the faculty members.
I knew most of the support people.
So I could manage very well in a non-antagonistic way.
I mean, I think I did a good job in low key.
And I had been there as an assistant dean.
I don't remember two years when Gordon took over.
And he immediately boosted my title up to associate so that I'd be on a par with these other people and these other
How many years did you do that?
Total, fourteen.
Fourteen.
During those years, share with this machine some of the types of issues that you worked with, with students and with others.
What were the typical matters that came your way?
Typical matters.
I think the
One of the overriding problems with students in our college was always the math problem.
I mean, we're talking about academics now.
The math problem.
Trying to get students to understand that they needed to, even to do applied science, like geology, they still needed to do well in mathematics.
And as a result, you know, many of these students wanted to go off to Blinn to take math and chemistry.
And I don't know if it's possible today to say no, but I would not allow them to take any of their basic math off campus.
Now, it didn't mean necessarily that the teaching at Blinn is bad.
In fact, they may spend more time with students, but they didn't always cover as much material.
And the students would come back and take the next semester calculus and they're in trouble.
That certainly was one problem.
Let's stay with that a second.
On the math, were there times when you had the impression
that our mathematics faculty did not care enough about the students in those basic courses?
Well, that was an issue because I was a member of AOC for years and years.
And, of course, that was an issue that frequently discussed.
I think the basic problem, not so much that
It was true of some of the math teachers.
They probably couldn't have cared less.
But when you're faced with teaching a class 100 students in calculus,
And then you assign the, I mean, for the lectures.
And then the problem sessions are smaller, but they're assigned to graduate students of varying skills.
And national backgrounds.
And national backgrounds, obviously, you know, those issues used to come up at AOC.
Now, one thing I did do, I'm trying to remember now,
At one time, A&M entering students took the SAT only.
What is the other?
ACT.
ACT, okay.
I am the one that raised that issue before the AOC that really made it possible for students to use ACT scores.
And it turns out, for example, as I pointed out, one of the problems may have been, I've got to be a little careful, better turn that off a minute.
Matt, what were some of the other problems that the Associate Dean dealt with?
Oh, well,
I can remember one afternoon where I had a student that was in difficulty and had asked her to come in to see me.
And I've forgotten whether she was on probation, but she showed up in her cocktail dress.
She was
going on to work at one of the local cocktail lounges.
And she created a certain amount of consternation in the dean's office.
So I don't know whether that was a problem or a pleasure.
One of the things that I tried to do and did not succeed, I wanted to see our
Geology 101, the general course for non-majors, which is the bread and butter in the college, replaced with a two-semester sequence that integrated all the earth sciences.
I felt this was important for several reasons.
Perhaps one is that I felt all these young people going out from A&M, they need to know something about the atmosphere, the river, flood plains of rivers.
They're going to be citizens.
They're going to have to vote on these issues.
And I felt that you could really put together a really dynamic, great course that integrated those disciplines.
I suddenly found I was treading on turf.
And so that got shelved.
And I was pleased that Bob Deuce later, that was one of his agenda items.
I don't think anything's ever happened to it now, but I still think that that would have been a very positive thing for us to do.
I agree with you entirely on that one.
Did you ever have any, and don't mention any names if you have any response to this, did you ever have any person off campus, a board member,
a wealthy Texan, a politician, or anybody attempt to twist your arm in any way on any student matter?
No.
Not in my, not, maybe the dean, maybe the dean did.
But you never did.
But it never came down to me.
And for example, Mike Halbooty had a nephew who came to A&M,
And Mike said, you know, you're on your own.
And he flunked out after the first semester.
Never, no problems.
No problems.
Very good.
I give a lot of credit.
So I never had that, I've had
parents that have screamed at me, but I've never had pressure that came on me directly from board members or politicians or so forth.
Did you ever have a parent threaten you that they were going to get you fired or anything like that?
Did any parent ever
No, but I've had one tell me that I was a lousy, lousy dean and I was a horrible person and so forth and so on.
And I'm going to go to the dean and talk about this.
And I've had, certainly had parents that have gone over my head to talk with the dean.
All right, let's go to the other side.
Share and let's record some positive recollections you have about how a decision that you made regarding a student later turned out that student came back and had some good words.